![](media/image1.png)

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">\
Brain </span>**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Drain </span>**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Higher Educational </span>**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">in the </span>**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">City’s North-east </span>**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">And The Case </span>**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">for</span>**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">University</span>**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">A Report </span>**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Commissioned</span>**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">by The Friends of </span>**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">University </span>**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Inc. </span>**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Prepared by</span>**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Peter Vintila </span>**

> **Whether you work at a university, a corporate lab… or on a factory
> floor, the value you bring to the organization is in your head, rather
> than your hands, back or legs. The key to success, the competitive
> advantage, for a firm, a city or region lies in harnessing the
> knowledge and ideas of everybody and inventing new ways of doing
> things….. We humans – our minds and our ideas – are the most important
> factor of production of all.**
>
> **Richard Florida, *Rise of the Creative Class*, Basic Books, ,
> 2002.**

<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Copyright</span>

<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Citizenonline 2005</span>

**\
**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Table of Contents</span>**

1.  **Objective and Context of the Report**

2.  **Key Recommendations: Our Ten Point Plan**

3.  **Argument of the Report**

4.  **and Beyond**

5.  **Where Are We Now? **

6.  **Lessons from the Past **

7.  **A Tough *Act* to Follow **

8.  **A Suitable Piece of Real Estate **

### 

1.  ####  University Funding – the Shape of Things to Come

#### 

1.  **Conclusions **

**\
<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Photo exhibits</span>**

The photos reproduced in this Report do not relate to specific
discussions or arguments. They relate, rather, to the spirit and purpose
of the whole case made. They also reveal just a little of the treasure
that is the Midland Railway Workshops Site. The value of that treasure
has been best captured in an extensive report on the Midland Workshops'
huge collection of machinery and plant prepared by C. and M. Doring –
see extended quote on adjacent page.

Whether heritage centre development plans for the Midland Workshops
realise the promise identified by the Dorings remains to be seen. While
Friends of Midland University are concerned about this, our major
interest – and the major interest of this Report lies elsewhere. We
include the historical photos, however, for a number of reasons.

First, they hint at the treasures identified by the Doring Report and
begin to illustrate the status which the Workshops could and, perhaps,
should enjoy as ‘sacred site’. Yes, histories of WA demonstrate that the
Work-shops were of immeasurable im-portance to the industrial
development of WA as well as to its social and labour history. To call
upon a famous precedent, one at least wants to say “Not too many
merchants here please” - and our Report does.

A further question then arises: “Who can more properly occupy this
‘sacred’ precinct?” If one thinks of the creativity displayed, the
determination and willingness to work demonstrated, the capacity to
improvise and innovate shown, the scale and variety of learning
undertaken, the stores of knowledge acquired and passed on by workers
and managers alike… if one thinks of all of this, the answer is
obvious…… ***.***

> **“… the Workshops collection of equipment gives one of the most
> complete overviews of early to mid 20th century industrial engineering
> processes, which could not be found anywhere…. Midland Workshops has
> the potential to become an industrial museum of national or even
> international repute at which the public could watch manufacturing
> processes happening they could only read about elsewhere.… **
>
> **Great industrial Museums in , the in and the Smithsonian in all
> depend on static collections of disused machinery for their major
> displays. At the Powerhouse Museum in Sydney the opportunity for even
> a non-working display of historic powerhouse equipment was lost at the
> adaptation stage and this well known "Museum of Technology has only a
> meagre display of a few pieces of industrial machinery, unrelated to
> each other or to the building they are in. **
>
> **At Ironbridge, the most famous industrial museum in the world, there
> is no working machinery on display.…. In contrast to the village scale
> and static displays of Ironbridge, Midland could give working
> demonstrations of metal moulding and casting, metal machining, manual
> and mechanical blacksmithing, mechanical woodworking, pattern making,
> hydraulic press forming, materials testing and so on using industrial
> scale machines in their genuine industrial settings…”**
>
> *Midland Workshops Industrial Archaeological Study* prepared by C and
> M Doring and Associate, 1994.

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">\
</span>**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">1. Objective and Context
</span>**

This aim of this Report is to build on the considerable momentum and
community support that already exists for the development of university
facilities in . For the past 3 years, our small community organization
has given a name to these facilities – – not because we are wedded to a
particular name, but because we are committed to a concept. That is to
say, we are committed to the concept of a substantial, centrally located
university presence in accommodating 10,000 students by the year 2030.
Whether that be an independent uni-versity or a “branch” campus of
another university does not matter. both needs and deserves a
development of this kind.

The Report proper opens with a vision of - ***and beyond -*** as a town
transformed by the development of a university centred on the Railway
Workshop Site over the next quarter century***.*** To be sure, this a
vision and, according to the new Chairman of the Midland Redevelopment
Authority, just idle fantasy. To this we say that some dreams, no matter
how im-possible they may seem, are worth having. But, dreams and visions
to one side, we also respectfully disagree with the new Chairman’s
assessment of the real world. In truth, the development of a major
university in town over the 25 years – but beginning ***now*** - is a
perfectly reasonable aspiration.

The title of this Report could not be more applicable than it is to the
experience of . In the year 2000 there were some 7,500 university
students with home post codes in the region. With the exception of
perhaps 30 students in the coming year,[^1] today’s students living in
the region all travel – or relocate - to the city’s western suburbs for
their university education. Unless substan-tial university facilities
are built in the City’s north-eastern quarter over the next 25 years,
some 15 - 20,000[^2] stud-ents could be travelling to the west for their
higher education. That is ***brain draining*** on a shameless scale and
the map shown overleaf demonstrates, at a glance, how and why this might
happen. Some accompanying statistics are also worth citing immediately.

Regional comparisons are shown in the Box below. The west is much better
off than the east as whole. But young people living in the local
government areas enjoying beachfront or foreshore – “the first eleven” –
not only have easier access to sail, surf and sun but also to study. By
the measure used below, they are ***1250 times*** better off than their
poorer eastern cousins in terms of access to university. As the figures
indicate, these localities form a region of ***higher educational
superabundance, hosting an astonishing 1 university place per 4 head of
population.*** The correspond-ing figure for the west as whole is ***1
per 50*** while that for the east is ***1 per 5,000.***

###### **University places per 1,000 head of population in metropolitan **

**Eastern Suburbs **

**(LGAs east of CBD) 0.2 **

**Western Suburbs **

**(LGAs west of CBD) 50.0 **

**“First Eleven” **

**(central and inner Western LGAs **

**enjoying beach front and **

**foreshore)** **250.0**

Note: Table relates to the year 2000. For data sources and definition of
regions see citizenonline.org

In the context of higher eduction, “brain draining” brings with it other
important losses. Thus, full time stud-ents are worth roughly
\$20,000[^3] pa in terms of the money they spend on tuition and living
costs. In today this amounts to some \$150 mil-lion. Most of this money
could circ-ulate productively in ’s local and regional economies for
some time – if there were a university operating on a sufficient scale.
In the absence of substantial facilities, the regional fin-ancial drain
could well reach \$400 million pa in 25 years.

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Current unequal
treatment</span>**

Three of ’s public universities enjoyed substantial original land grants
of 1600 ha (UWA), 260 ha (Murdoch) and 80 ha (Curtin). It is it true
that some of the advantages enjoyed by the west in this regard reflect
history – especially in the case of UWA which received its original land
grants a century ago.

But historical factors do not tell the whole story. For example, Edith
Cowan University (ECU) services a regional population of about 136,000
of whom some 4,400[^4] are university students. Today these students can
compete for some 6,000 regional places. now has about ***one half of one
percent*** as many – perhaps 30 actual places. And this is to service a
regional population and a regional university student population which
are both around ***twice as high*** as those to the City’s north:
271,000 and 7,600 respectively. Against this background, ECU is
currently selling land granted to it by the State Government and
anticipates a \$40 million profit.

Why can’t make a comparable claim and be taken seriously? Do the
relevant authorities think that people in can’t do basic arithmetic or
make simple comparisons? Is that why they resist the claim for a
university?

![](media/image2.jpeg)

#### 

#### Table 1 ’s Population, University Places and University Students by Urban Location

  ----------------- ------------ ------------------- ---------------------
                    Population   University Places   University Students
  Western Suburbs   886,334      45,841              33,808
  Eastern Suburbs   474,882      98                  13,131
  Total             1,361,,216   46,939              46,939
  ----------------- ------------ ------------------- ---------------------

Sources: ABS, UWA Curtin Murdoch and (data for years 2000-01).

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">\
2. Key recommendations – Our Ten Point Plan</span>**

The State Government should:

1.  **guarantee** the availability of suff-icient land on the Midland
    > Railway Workshop Site for the long term future higher educational
    > needs of ;

2.  **amend** the *Redevelop-ment Act* so that it enshrines a commitment
    > to a Midland Higher Education Precinct (incorporating a a strong
    > university presence) in legislation;

3.  **establish** a new Management Board for the Redev-elopment
    > Authority (MRA) that brings together expertise and experience
    > relevant to the amended *Act;*

4.  **direct** the Board to develop a 20-25 year strategic redevelopment
    > plan based on a clear vision of the region’s future and a well
    > re-searched understanding of its future higher educational needs;

5.  **establish** an expanded and appropriately qualified Executive and
    > provide the new Board and Executive with an adequate work-ing
    > budget – not just loans which force premature land sales;

6.  **direct** the Board to develop a strat-egic plan that provides for
    > in-tegrated senior high school, tech-nical and university
    > education;

7.  **direct** the Board to develop a strategic plan integrating
    > heritage, secondary, technical and higher educational uses in
    > order to max-imise community access, potential for innovation and
    > institutional synergy;

8.  **ensure** that current community and education initiatives relating
    > to heritage and higher education take their place within the
    > framework of a long term planning and dis-courage ad hoc
    > initiatives;

9.  **order** a review of the original financial modelling and
    > forecasting conducted by the MRA in order to plan its
    > redevelopment work;

10. **encourage** the State’s existing universities to develop an
    > “industry plan” which incorporates a clear social charter and
    > which refers to the higher educational needs and reasonable
    > expectations of all people in WA.

![](media/image3.png)**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">\
3. Argument in brief</span>**

As with universities anywhere, the de-velopment of a university in in
coming decades depends on the following requirements:

-   qualified students;

-   suitably located land;

-   money; and

-   political will.

As the brief discussion below will indicate, these requirements, with
the exception of the last, can be met without great difficulty in .

#### <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Students</span>

Today there are at least 7,500 uni-versity students in the region and
this number could well grow to 20,000 over the next 20 years. If just
half of these students chose to study closer to home, a 10,000 student
campus would be filled. And this does not count students who might
travel to from elsewhere in the metro area – or come as overseas
students. This evidence is explored in Section 5 of the Report –
***Where are we now?*** In short, the demand for a very substantial
higher education precinct with a university presence as its backbone
will certainly be there by 2030.

#### <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Land</span>

The land is also there – 110 or so ha owned by the Midland Development
Authority (MRA). This land is centred on the Railway Workshop Site,
abuts ’s railway station and is within walking distance of the city
centre. In short, its location is fantastic and it is cheap as well -
around \$100 per square metre when cleaned up and serviced.[^5]

Of course matters are not quite so simple. The MRA has plans for site.
Some of these are good - including plans for the western portion of the
site or the Helena Precinct - but remain incomplete.[^6] Others are not
so good. And here we are principally talking about plans for most of the
40 or so usable hectares of land to the east of the Helena Precinct.
These plans ded-icate land to substantial commercial, bulk goods retail
and light industrial development.[^7]

Current plans for the eastern end of the site are poor for a number of
reasons. They are unlikely to contribute to the MRA’s self-assumed
objectives such as “leading the revitalisation of ”. More specifically,
they do not sit well with plans for the western half of the site or old
town centre. The old town centre does not need competing commercial
development – especially when plans are afoot for the massive
redevelopment of the railway car park and Centrepoint sites. And it
needs more bulk goods retail and light industrial capacity on its
threshold even less - especially when these car-intensive forms of
development are placed in a rail corridor.

This is poor planning at the best of times. In an era desperate to
reduce greenhouse emissions it is downright irresponsible. will not
be-come a vibrant and attractive 21^st^ regional city or economic driver
in this way. The MRA’s plans commit too much land to uses which are
economically sterile, which discourage street life, which degrade urban
space and which squander opportunities for enhanced sustainability -
more bulk goods retail and more light industrial development. It hardly
seems credible that anyone, other than the bulk goods retail sector,
believes that needs more of these facilities so close to town.

It is true that part of the MRA’s plans for the site’s western end,
including its huge heritage buildings, involve a “community education
centre” built largely around high school and TAFE teaching facilities.
But early plans for this centre remain tentative and, in any event,
contain no provision for a significant university presence now or in the
future.

The arguments outlined above are principally developed in Sections 6, 7
and 8 of the Report. Section 6 - ***Lessons from the past* -** comments
briefly on the State Government’s historic role in granting land to the
city’s existing universities focussing variously on the timing, scale
and importance of those grants. Section 7 - ***A tough Act to follow***
– argues that the MRA’s poor planning decisions and its failure to take
a serious interest in higher education planning are prin-cipally a
function of its limited charter - the *Midland Redevelopment Act.*

Having said that, the vacant land is still there. At this point in time,
only poor and reversible planning decisions stand between the land and
its availability. However, in due course actual development driven by
poor plans could change this. Opportunities could be lost. Section 8 of
the Report - ***A suitable piece of real estate***[^8] – high- lights
the importance of prudence in this context. The immediate challenge is
simply to avoid squandering opportunities not likely to last forever.

#### <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Money</span>

Key funding issues are discussed in Section 9 of the Report
***(University funding- the shape of things to come).*** Here the Report
basically argues that objections to new university de-velopment based on
the unavailability of funds are either ill-considered or outdated. They
are ill-considered be-cause the University sector will continue to grow
in forthcoming decades – perhaps doubling over the next 25 years.[^9]
There is, therefore, no question about the need for new capacity. The
outstanding question here is not “whether”, but “where” to build new
capacity. And of course we should ask here: Will new capacity in , add
to superabundance in the west or will it make good almost total neglect
in the east?

**Demand for university places may double in the next 25 years across –
requiring lots of new capacity. Why shouldn’t some of this capacity be
planned and built in ? **

The argument is out of date because, in one way or another, students are
be-coming “higher education customers” and are or will become
self-funding. They are being called upon to save or borrow more but even
where gov-ernment grants continue to provide subsidy, these granted
funds are increasingly conceptualised and con-structed as individual
student assets or income – for which universities must compete. Thus
students become customers and, for better or worse, market disciplines
are imposed on universities.

More to the point, when students queue up at the university’s gate, they
are cashed up and ready to go. Considered within the framework of this
bigger picture, the “no money” argument is a hoax. Students in already
have the money to pay for a university in . Thus the 10,000 students who
may elect to study in in 25 years time would be paying some \$100
million pa to .

**Would \$100 million be enough to run ? If higher education has been
properly costed by the financial experts, it must be. But a rough and
ready reality check is possible. currently provides tuition to its
13,000 students for less than \$130 million pa. is in the ball park. **

This argument does not mean that there is no financing challenge. The
real nature of that challenge, however, is different from the manner in
which it is usually presented: it is not a matter of finding money to
maintain a university in . It is a matter of finding the political
courage necessary to change a long standing arrangement which forces
university students to leave with their money – to the great
disadvantage of many of those students and to the perhaps greater
disadvantage of the region. This Report, again, estimates, that in 25
years time, Midland’s 20,000 university students will be taking around
\$400 million pa out of the local economy as they travel and spend
“abroad” for their higher education – a level of investment sufficient
for about 8,000 full time jobs.

#### <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Political will</span>

What can the State Government do to change things. In short, it needs to
reverse an ill considered decision which is committing a tract of urban
land to unspecified bulk goods retail, commercial and light industrial
uses. And it needs to reserve that land for future higher education and
university development instead. When the time is right, the Government
needs to vest this land in a higher education planning body (Why not the
Midland City University Planning Group). This should certainly happen
within the term of the next State Government.

If it turns out that no capital funds from traditional public sources
can be found, then an entrepreneurial planning board should be
authorised to seek out lenders, private investors and joint venturers
willing to invest com-mercially in a growth industry. Erect your
buildings, plant your gardens, hire your staff…. and there’s your
university. After that, student fees calculated on a full-cost recovery
basis keep it going. Hopefully, too, HECS loans and public subsidies
will still be kicking in so that poorer students are not ruled out. Any
Commonwealth policy decisions of this kind will hit the region hard.

The existing universities may not like having some of their future
business diverted in this way - and this is the real test of political
will. But the State Government should firmly and politely invite them
either to set up shop in or mind their own businesses. It is not the
State Government’s first responsibility to make life easier for large
commercialising and corporat-ising institutions at the expense of
disadvantaged students and regions – or at least one would hope not.

This final point should have traction with both major political parties,
even if they once had different moral vocabularies to address such
problems. For the Labor Party, the situation should still be
recognisable as simple injustice (easy access to universities for some –
the relatively affluent - and difficult access for others – the
relatively poor) while for the Liberals the problem turns on the
improper restriction of competition and abuse of market power. Either
Gov-ernments should not aid and abet here.

**\
 <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">4. and beyond</span>**

### <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">2000 - A Portrait of Decline</span>

At the northern end of ’s once proud and vibrant main street - the
beautifully named - stands a complex of shiny new multi-storey offices
accommodating government guest workers from to each week day. They
provide trade for a few smarter lunchtime cafes and the refurbished
Council Club. Otherwise the insubstantial presence of these workers
demonstrates how hard it is to revive old town centres suffering from
the ravages of time, industrial decline and an out-of-town shopping
mall - Midland Gate.

The rest of hosts less-than-chic real estate offices, accounting firms,
solicitors’ rooms and professional medical suites. A local MP makes a
symbolic show of loyalty and a few retailers of new and discounted wares
are also toughing it out. But even King Kong, that discounter of all
discounters, has left the old city centre and attached itself to Midland
Gate’s more bounteous skirts. The rest of the stayers include second
hand clothing and furniture shops, a security firm, short term money
lenders, martial arts trainers, a petrol station, an “adult” shop and
brothel and a down-at-heel car rental business. In any thriving town,
many of these businesses would have backstreet addresses. To its
southern end hosts an older, smaller shopping mall - Centrepoint – which
turns a blank windowless face to the street. Finally, opposite this
blank windowless face stands a weary railway terminal and bus
interchange.

To complete the picture of urban decline, the whole of the strip is
frequently punctuated by the sorry display of permanently padlocked
doors, blanked out shop fronts and darkened, dusty arcades. There is
more – or should I say, there will soon be less. Just around corner from
hosts a small twin theatre cinema complex – the Regent. The Regent is
likely to collapse if Midland Gate develops its planned 8 theatre strong
complex.

### 

Whether intentionally or not, the proprietors of Midland Gate –
encouraged by the town’s planners - are creating a new town centre. As
this report goes to press they are expanding their mall even though it
is clear that cannot, as things stand, support two centres. The old town
needs something new.

**\
<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Beyond 2020 – A Picture of
Revival</span>**

Today is a bustling town and reinvigorated regional centre. The old town
is no longer as it was 25 years ago: often sluggish by day; moribund and
sometimes dangerous by night. It has undergone a transformation – not
unlike the transformation that overtook Fremantle in the last quarter of
the 20^th^ century. But also different.

Like Fremantle following its transformation, pulses with both daytime
and night-time life. Its major artery - its South Terrace - is . And
like South Terrace, caters for the new knowledge workers and aspiring
knowledge workers crowding its expanded pedestrian zones. Gone are the
low rent uses of yesteryear and in their place one finds busy internet
cafes now serving not just as email stations but as street front
research facilities and digital news outlets offering global connections
in real time. For old print junkies, there are new and second hand
bookshops and news agencies still selling ink on paper. Last, but far
from least, Helena Street now also hosts the predictable super-abundance
of thriving coffee shops, tea houses, wine and boutique beer bars, fast
food outlets and restaurants serving multicultural fare 7 days a week
and long into the night.

Filled to its brim, ’s good fortune is now overflowing into the network
of side streets surrounding it – but not all of this can be described in
this briefest of portraits. Only perhaps the restored Regent Cinema
complex, still just around the corner, should be mentioned. It was
restored a few years ago when purchased by the rapidly expanding . The
Regent now rivals ’s most successful art-house cinemas and its screening
facilities showcase experimental community and student film and
television productions. This work and the Swan School of Film and
Television from which it comes are also part of Midland City University
located just a few hundred metres down Helena street in the old Midland
Railway Workshop site. The Swan School of Film and Television and the
huge unencumbered space it occupies in a main Workshop shed make it the
envy of every media production studio in the country. How has all of
this come to pass?

In the course of the last 25 years, , old , has become a university town
and the knowledge economy is seriously taking root. Aspiring and
accomplished knowledge workers alike are increasingly deciding to live
and play in the place in which they work. As they do so, they are not
just laying foundations for tomorrow. They are also generating new
businesses and business opportunities of all kinds today. They are
filling and its tributaries with varied economic activity and a diverse
cultural life. This means jobs and it also creates a necessary part of
the milieu in which high-end knowledge economy work flourishes.

Racially and ethnically, the streets have that rich new global
cosmopolitan feel. ’s innovative teaching and research programs are
attracting overseas students in increasing numbers. More significantly,
perhaps, also now has the highest proportion of indigenous university
students in the whole of .

In the early years when the University and larger precinct of which it
is now the centrepiece were little more than a dream, very few believed
it could happen. The turning point came in 2005 when the then State
Government took steps to amend *the Redevelopment Act* and overhaul the
Midland Redevelopment Authority. Also, in a rare moment of
bipartisanship, the Opposition sup-ported these changes. The rest, as
they say, is now history.

![](media/image4.png)

general view of wagon shop

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">\
</span>**![](media/image5.png)

#### construction of the shell annexe 

![](media/image6.png)

**chief engineer’s office and peace memorial **

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">5. Where are we now?</span>**

Three years ago, Friends of Midland University published a paper on its
website (www. citizenonline.org). The paper, entitled *Knowledge Rich;
Knowledge Poor*,[^10] investigated the distribution of opportunities for
higher learning in metropolitan . The investigation revealed staggering
differences between the city’s eastern and western regions: while the
city’s western side provided one university place per 20 head of
population, the eastern side enjoyed the benefit of just one place per
5,000. Following the recent closure of Edith Cowan’s (ECU) tiny facility
in , however, there are now less places still in the east.

Commenting on the closure of the ECU facility late last year, ECU’s Vice
Chancellor ventured the following consolation:

> We believe major campuses provide much richer experiences for
> students.

Friends of could not agree more with the Vice Chancellor. We, however,
draw a very different conclusion. Our conclusion is not that is better
off with nothing. We conclude, rather, that needs ***its own major
campus*** – one commensurate with current and future local demand. The
numbers here, are striking as well. In the year 2000, the region was
home to some 7,500 students.[^11] And by 2025 this number will double
and perhaps even grow to 20,000.[^12] Additionally, a major campus in
could well also capture a significant proportion of what may by then be
a large number of overseas students studying in .[^13]

A new or university campus does not have to be a clone of our existing
universities. Indeed, a new university in will offer great scope for
innovation. But whatever else it may be or become, higher education
development in needs to be pursued as a substantial and serious
undertaking. Its scale, again, needs to provide a reasonable response to
growing regional demand. It also needs to be able to confer real and
competitive degrees in quantities and varieties matching the region’s
economic, social and cultural aspirations. As for teaching and research
agendas, these should be planned in a manner that gives real voice to
local industry and community interests.

**Higher education in needs to be pursued as a serious undertaking. Its
scale needs to provide a reasonable response to growing regional demand.
It also needs to be able to confer real and competitive degrees in
quantities and varieties matching the region’s economic, social and
cultural aspirations. **

It will certainly not be possible to start building these facilities
next year or even in the next three or four years. But given demand
forecasts, it will become increasingly important to begin serious
building in five or six years time. For this to happen, however,
strategic planning and

#### <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">brazing flanges</span>

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">boring machine designed built
by workshops</span>**

serious land reservation must begin now.

Much of the argument developed in the balance of this Report addresses
these two issues:

-   the immediate need for serious strategic planning **-** planning
    which is firmly anchored in long term demand forecasts and careful
    social and economic impact assessments;

-   the need for serious land reservation.

Land reservation, furthermore, needs to focus principally on the Midland
Railway workshops site - for land better suited to the development of
higher education facilities is hardly imaginable (see **Box 1**).

***The Midland Railway Workshop Site***

**The Railway Workshop site, now controlled by the Redevelopment
Authority, encompasses a large tract (some 80 hectares) of inner urban
land. The site adjoins the town centre and envelops a major railway
station and bus terminal. The site also contains a breathtaking
collection of heritage buildings and industrial artefacts. Never has a
site lent itself more perfectly to rehabilitation and re-use as a higher
educational precinct and university campus. There are extraordinary and
extraordinarily large buildings to be restored and re-used. The site is
perfectly located to accommodate new educational buildings and
facilities – again it abuts a town centre and it offers far better
public transport connections than any of ’s other campuses. Finally, the
site is substantial, offering room for new building, for open space and
for complementary uses. **

The need for 25 year planning horizons will not be obvious to all. As
indicated in the following section of this Report, however, some 10
years separated the *University Endowment Act* of 1904[^14] and the
establishment of the University of Western Australia (UWA). Almost
another 10 years went by before UWA actually moved – in 1923 - to the
site it now occupies. Working within timeframes so scaled is simply the
intelligent thing to do when planning such expensive and strategically
important social infrastructure. Those who pioneered the development of
higher education in WA a century ago understood this very well indeed.

#### Planning for higher education in needs to be not just strategic and long term. It also needs to be cast in strong ethical and social justice terms. And it needs to be supported by hard empirical evidence. Tough, ethically and empirically informed argument limits opportunities for ill-defined commitment, for vague political promises and for bureaucratic prevarication. It is the responsibility of those campaigning seriously for higher education facilities in today to limit these opportunities and to extract clear and firm undertakings. It is a major aim of this Report to contribute to these ends. 

![](media/image9.png)

general view coppersmith shop

![](media/image10.png)

**shaper machines **

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">\
6. Lessons from the past</span>**

For the first decade of its life, the was housed in temporary
accommodation in in the centre. Only in 1923 did the young University
move to the magnificent site on the foreshore at . This site, as we all
know, would become the University’s permanent home. It encompassed some
67 ha and, today, this may strike us as a very generous land grant given
the tiny size of the University in its early days.

It is important to remember, however, that State Governments at the time
were moved by genuinely long term visions and unconstrained by impatient
development imperatives. As Professor Fred Alexander has made clear in
his history of UWA, they had a real commitment to the future growth of
the State’s higher education capacity. The now often glib language of
the knowledge economy may have been foreign to them, but their thinking
was ahead of its time. Just what we want of our higher education
planners.

Nor was the 67-hectare site all. Indeed, it was just a small part of a
parcel of endowment lands extending to almost 1600 hectares. This land
was set aside by the *University Endowment Act* of 1904 when the
University was little more than an idea. Land was the most useful and
durable resource that the State could make available to an infant
institution of higher learning. Provided that it was of sufficient
quantity and quality, land could accommodate institutional growth long
into the future. It was also able to serve as a flexible and continually
appreciating asset that could be sold, swapped, used to secure borrowing
or just rented out.

It is impossible to overestimate the wise and farsighted nature of these
public land grants and it is worth dwelling on their consequences a
little longer. Firstly, those taking charge of the land were not
subjected to any pressures to develop quickly – let alone turn a profit.
Nor, while they attended to the growth of their new institution, were
they required to face competition from rival development proposals or
pressure from a State Treasury anxious about its credit rating. No, they
were effectively given the land and were allowed to get on with the job
of developing the State’s capacity for higher education. This task was
challenging enough and everyone, again, understood that patience and
long-term development horizons were necessary.

Though much less generous than UWA’s endowments, ’s other public
universities have also received significant grants of public land. The
principal campuses of Murdoch and are 260 hectares and 80 hectares
respectively. Edith Cowan, as an amalgamation of the State’s former
Colleges of Advanced Education, enjoys secure leases over a number of
former CAE campuses. Additionally, it has recently acquired one of these
campuses (Churchlands) outright and will sell it to finance
consolidation and capital works at Joondalup. Recent newspaper reports
have assigned a net value of \$40 million to this site. Yet in today,
this seems too much too ask The Chairman of the MRA dismisses a
comparable claim in as fanciful. We still need to ask him why.

In Midland today, inner urban land that might be reserved for university
de-velopment at very low cost[^15] is currently destined to accommodate
bulk retail and light industrial facil-ities. A third – or perhaps
more - of the total Workshop Site and its ad-joining publicly owned land
is ear-marked for these low-grade uses. Given the size (and value) of ’s
other university campuses, reserving this land for future university
de-velopment in is hardly a lot to ask. After all, which is likely to
have a greater need for in the decades immediately ahead – more bed
sheds and barbeques galore? Or more of the highest kinds of learning
that make for genuinely sustainable eco-nomic and social development?

In overall terms, the State has clearly invested in higher education and
in the knowledge economy – but that investment, as the **table and map**
below show, is not very fair.

.

**The Chairman of the MRA has dismissed ’s claim for equitable treatment
in terms of university land grants as fanciful. He has still not
explained himself.**

What is likely to need more urgently in the decades immediately ahead?
More bed sheds and barbeques galore? Or more of the highest kinds of
learning that make for genuinely sustainable economic and social
development.

**Table 1: Unequal access to higher education**
===============================================

  ------------------------------------------------- ----------------------- ------------------------- -------------------------- -----------------------
                                                    **Central catchment**   **Joondalup catchment**   **Rockingham catchment**   **Midland catchment**
                                                    =====================   =======================   ========================   =====================

  Population                                        649,100                 136,400                   258,600                    270,900
  ==========                                        =======                 ========                  ========                   =======

  University students                               30,200                  4,400                     5,000                      7,600
  ===================                               ======                  =====                     =====                      =====

  University participation rates                    4.7%                    3.2%                      1.9%                       2.8%
  ==============================                    ====                    ====                      ====                       ====

  University places                                 42,100                  4,200                     550                        100
  ==================                                ======                  =====                     ===                        ===

  University places per 1,000 head of population    66.7                    31.3                      2.1                        0.4
  ===============================================   ====                    ====                      ===                        ===

  Homeswest rentals as % of all rentals             16.9%                   7.8%                      22.1%                      21.4%
  =====================================             =====                   ====                      =====                      =====
  ------------------------------------------------- ----------------------- ------------------------- -------------------------- -----------------------

Notes: Table relates to the year 2000. For data sources and definition
of regions, see citizenonline.org (maps and graphics). Today, as a
result of the ECU campus closure, ’s university places are probably down
by 50% on the above figures. **See Map to accompany table and define
catchments on the following page.**

Row 5 provides a population weighted measure – university places per
1,000 head of population – and is the most telling. Values range from
66.7 to 0.4. In other words, inner and inner western enjoy a level of
provision which is around 170 times more generous than or north-eastern
. Even Rockingham, which hosts only very limited facilities, is 5 times
better-off than . Links between university provision and academic
performance (measured as university participation rates) and social
dis-advantage (measured as Homeswest rentals) are also significant.

Overall, the inequalities revealed in the table above are becoming more
apparent to communities in the region. But the State Government appears
reluctant to remedy them. The rhetoric is certainly there. Thus, State
Education Minister Alan Carpenter has recently referred to the idea of
an education or community learning precinct as an “exciting visionary
concept” while local MLA and Minister for Police, Michelle Roberts, has,
in the same spirit, declared that “Midland could provide a phenomenal
hub for learning.” [^16]

So far, however, the concept planning is based almost solely on
secondary and TAFE facilities. And these, has already. To be sure,
relocating some of these facilities to the Workshop site could result in
important new developments and improvements – but, in the final
analysis, relocated facilities are not new facilities. What would be
genuinely new in the region, what would really be “exciting and
visionary”, and what would make for a truly “phenomenal learning hub” is
a community learning centre based on a strong and innovative university
pre-sence. So far, sadly, no such presence figures in the plans.

In an unexpected turn of events, the Commonwealth Government, in the
person of Brendan Nelson, Federal Minister for Education, has promised
20 full time places through . It is difficult to know whether this was
more than one-off impulsive gesture at a celebrity breakfast intended to
generate political capital – but it makes for a significantly smaller
university presence than that provided by Edith Cowan in its failed
experiment on the Railway Workshop Site. However one interprets this
gesture, it puts the ball squarely in the State Government’s court.

So why is it hesitating. Why would it prefer to see yet further light
industrial and bulk retail development in close proximity to the town
centre than a university campus? One or two simple reasons are worth
briefly exploring. The region suffers from forms of social disadvantage
(see below) that can distort regional public investment decisions.
Social disadvantage can limit lobbying power, diminish influence and
generate stigma. Poorer people often tend to be less skilled at
organising themselves. It is also still widely believed that poorer
people deserve their disadvantage and wealthier people their privileges
– because they are more clever and hardworking. And this applies even to
their publicly funded privileges - like universities.

The continuing build up of major university facilities in ’s northern
region provides these arguments with spectacular evidence. is now
establishing itself in Joondalup to service the city’s northern
corridor. The population it services in that region is about 136,000,
the number of enrolled university students living in the region is
around 4,400 and the number of university places locally available to
them is around 6,000.

, by contrast, has about **one percent** as many places – perhaps
30[^17]. And this is to service a regional population and regional
university student population which are both around twice as high as
those to the City’s north. The figures for in Table 1 show are 271,000
and 7,600 respectively. Why is one region treated so well and the other
so grudgingly? And why do we live with this as though it was God’s plan
–part of a divinely ordained scheme of things?

. Educational and Social Disadvantage
-------------------------------------

**In 2004, the *West Australian* published results from an ABS analysis
of 2001 census data identifying ’s ten most and least disadvantaged
suburbs. **

**Four of the ten most disadvantaged were located in the immediate
vicinity of – including itself. Another four were to be found on the
edge of the larger region (ie ’s north eastern metropolitan quarter). **

**All of the most advantaged suburbs were, to no-one’s surprise, located
in the city’s inner western zone. There they formed – and this is more
surprising - part of a region of higher educational superabundance,
hosting an astonishing 1 university place per 4 head of population. This
figure should be compared with those indicated by Table 1 above. **

##### pouring castings

**\
**

**wheel press **

**mine-sweeping winch under construction\
**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">7. A tough *Act* to
follow</span>**

The difficulties faced by ’s heritage and higher education precinct
planners and campaigners are not all of this general nature. Indeed,
some of the most important problems are quite specific and can be found
to have their origins in the *Midland Redevelopment Act* (1999) – a
statute, ironically, put in place for ’s benefit.

The *Act* was the creation of a former conservative State Government. It
is essentially an *Act* that authorises land development and disposal
and the Midland Redevelopment Authority (MRA), has been structured
accord-ingly. Its principal statutory task is to develop and dispose of
a former industrial site over a 15 year period – of which 5 years have
now elapsed.

Given the problems of the site – contamination and the lack of
con-temporary infrastructure - it is hoped that land sale revenues will
cover rehabilitation and development costs. Thus the MRA enjoys a \$100
million line of credit with the State Gov-ernment to fund these works
and it is expected to repay this money with the proceeds of land sales.
Together with the lack of its own working capital, this imperative to
sell and payback casts a shadow over the MRA’s planning. The demands for
expensive heritage building maintenance and re-furbishment (at a
possible cost of \$50 million) make this situation worse still.
Additionally, the MRA Board and Executive were appointed accordingly –
to develop and sell off land in the expeditious manner required by the
*Act*. How could it be otherwise?

When all of these factors are taken together, it becomes apparent that
more imaginative and socially-oriented planning has little chance. Or
perhaps there is better way of putting this. While the *Act* presides
over the whole of ’s redevelopment, imaginative and socially oriented
planning are constrained in many ways and supported in just a few. The
outcome so far is an MRA concept plan – recently published as
***midland-metro*** - that fails to make optimal use of the whole site,
that does not cohere and that will not take into the 21^st^ century as a
vibrant, sustainable regional centre or economic driver.

To state the case briefly, ***midland-metro*** commits too much land to
economically dead-end uses that discourage street life and degrade urban
space – as noted above more bulk goods retail and more light industrial
development. It hardly seems credible that anyone, other than the bulk
goods retail sector, believes that needs more of these facilities so
close to town. is already a bulk goods retail town! In any event, with
the exception of police facilities, the entire eastern half of the
Workshop Site – some 50 ha of land - is to be effectively given over to
these uses. This land, it needs to be stressed, is bounded by the and a
railway line (incorporating a possible future new station) and falls
within 500 metres of ’s town centre.[^18]

In the light of these strategic amenities, commitment of the land in
question to such a low rent, car-intensive use is astonishing. These are
not planning decisions that will help to “revitalise” , as the MRA
promises. They will, rather, consign it to second-rate status as a
regional centre falling ever further behind its western counterparts.
And all of this, again, is the work of the *Midland Redevelopment Act*.
And the scene becomes almost tragic when excluded possibilities are
considered - a 10,000 student campus on the edge of town**. Again it
seems that fateful decisions are in prospect: as a bulk goods retail
centre or as a university town? **

It is also worth noting that Friends of Midland City University has put
the following questions to the MRA in a recent formal submission:

-   How much capacity is the MRA adding to ’s existing large format (ie
    bulk goods) retail capacity and what are the possibilities that it
    might contribute to an oversupply?

-   What are current vacancy rates in this commercial real estate sector
    in ?

-   Is appropriately zoned land avail-able for expansion of relevant
    capacity elsewhere in or around (and not on the town’s very
    doorstep)?

-   How likely is it that new capacity will be occupied by tenants
    vac-ating space elsewhere in – and not by new tenants – thereby
    contributing to further blight?

-   Might the release of commercially zoned land in the MRA precinct
    contribute to downward pressures on commercial land values and on
    the value of adjacent lands de-dicated to other and higher grade
    uses? (In other words, could the good planning intentions evident on
    the site’s west be undermined by current plans for the east?)

-   What are the likely local traffic, transport and environmental
    im-pacts?

-   What are the likely social impacts and opportunity costs?

The MRA either did not answer these questions or did not answer them
adequately.

**’s future as a “phenomenal learning hub” is real only in the exuberant
imaginations of two Ministers not attending to alternative advice – or
to the dimensions and historic scale of the region’s neglect. Yes, could
be so, but not on the basis of the MRA’s planned “community learning
centre” encompassing high school and TAFE relocations. **

To be sure, plans for the site’s Western end, including heritage
building space, documented in ***midland-metro,*** involve a “community
education centre” built largely around high school and TAFE teaching
facilities. The presence of this still embryonic centre is largely the
work of The Swan Tertiary Education Working Party **(see ).** Early
plans, however, contain no provision for a significant university
presence now or in the future and cynics have argued that it involves
little more than a reshuffling of secondary and TAFE capacity in . On
this view, ’s “phenomenal learning hub” is real only in the exuberant
imaginations of two Ministers not attending to alternative advice – or
to the dimensions and historic scale of the region’s neglect.

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   **The Swan Tertiary Education Working Party **
  ===============================================

  **The Working Party is the most important official committee involved in planning the Workshop’s future education facilities. It was initiated by the City of in 2002. The City also provides executive support the Working Party. Other participants include: **

  **the Redevelopment Authority (MRA); **

  **the Eastern Metropolitan Regional Council; **

  **Swan TAFE; **

  **Department of Educational Services; **

  **Department of Education and Training; **

  **Friends of ; **

  **the Swan Chamber of Commerce; **

  **and the Office of Michelle Roberts MLA. **

  **Membership of the Working Party also overlaps very considerably with another important stakeholder group in the future Workshops education precinct: the Department of Education and Training Local Area Planning Committee.**
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**8.** **<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">A suitable piece of real
estate</span>**

### 

### What can the State Government do to facilitate the development of serious higher education facilities in ? In general terms it simply needs to reduce the levels of uncertainty and the contrived sense of urgency that the *Midland Redevelopment Act* creates. It needs to slow down – and rebalance - a planning process which is dominated by commercial imperatives and which threatens foolish and possibly destructive land use.

###  

### Those making community and public interest claims on the Workshop site should not be required to work in such an environment. Nor should they, while working, be required to suffer the anxieties associated with changing electoral fortunes and political whim in its many forms. That is both destabilising and disrespectful. Indeed, it discourages engagement, disemp-owers community and erodes social capital. In short, it achieves the very opposite of what enlightened social policy today claims as its most important objectives.

###  

Social policy objectives to one side, general decency and values of fair
play require that community claims be given a guaranteed and usable
stake in the Workshop site. Additionally, the place of the site in WA’s
industrial development and labour history - and the losses that suffered
when the Workshops closed in 1994 - immeasurably strengthen this claim.

So how can a usable stake in the site be guaranteed? Essentially two
things need to done:

-   **first**, an appropriate portion of the Workshop site must be
    securely set aside and decisions here need to be set in the context
    of sufficiently long term planning horizons. What will ’s
    north-eastern region require in 20 or 30 years time? We plan our
    roads in more generous time frames than this. Is higher educat-ion
    less important?

-   **second**, the issue of higher edu-cation funding needs to be
    addressed in a more honest, creative and patient way.

### 

The remainder of this Section of the Report discusses the first of these
issues. The second issue is discussed in Section 9.

### <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Reserving an appropriate site</span>

The most important, most urgent and, luckily, the easiest thing to be
done involves setting aside a suitable portion of the Workshop site and
dedicating it to the development of a higher education precinct able to
acc-ommodate a growing university. And if we can bring our-selves to
think 30 years ahead, this should be the whole of the site not yet
firmly dedicated to other uses – lets say one of the three major
Workshop blocks and all land shown as hatched on ***mud map*** overleaf.
(Perhaps some this land will later be swapped for in-town sites; perhaps
not. Let the fledging university have a small land bank to give it both
solidity and flexibility.) There are various ways in which the land
could be set aside and those who founded UWA have provided one model
worthy of serious consideration: the *University Endowment Act* of 1904.

Of course, a endowment on the scale of the 1904 University endowment
could not reasonably be expected. But if, hypothetically, the balance of
the site to the east of the Helena Precinct was involved together with
Block C of the major Workshop buildings – some 40-50ha - this would be
less than one fifth of Murdoch’s land grant or roughly equal in size to
one half of Curtin’s 80 hectare campus in Bentley. Also its value would
almost certainly be less than the value of the Churchlands campus
recently granted freehold to for the benefit of ’s northern suburbs.

How hard his this? Minister Mc-Tiernan could, using the discretionary
powers assigned to her by the *Midland Redevelopment Act,* set aside a
suitable portion of the site. With the right will and a little
creativity, she could also remove this land in some irrevocable way from
the destructive wake of an extended land auction favouring lower grade
uses. But whether it is done in this or some other way, the reservation
and dedication of land should happen soon. It would be a real shot in
the arm for local campaigners and planners. It would also provide some
real protection against future political change. As things stand, ’s
community initiatives could still be scuttled; anchored in land, they
would become much more durable.

But serious support for higher ed-ucation in would do more. It would
show that the State Gov-ernment – whatever side is in power - was
motivated by a more expansive sense of community development. It would
also demonstrate that the Department of Planning and Infra-structure and
its Minister included in their ongoing *Dialogue with City*. For in this
*Dialogue*, the conversation often turns to strategic regional centres,
to their importance for ’s future growth and, using the Minister’s own
words, their past “failure to thrive”. In ’s case, the development of a
serious Higher Education Precinct could well mean the difference between
“thriving” and continuing to stagnate. (***See Box below***).

**Higher education & Midland’s regional economy**
=================================================

**Today, some \$75 million in direct higher education expenditure per
annum exits the north-eastern metropolitan region with its 7,500
commuting or relocating university students**[^19]**. This figure could
well rise to some \$200 million over the next two decades as population
and participation rates rise - and this would still be only part of the
loss suffered by the regional centre economy and its hinterland. For,
along with direct educational spending, goes indirect educational
spending - on books, stationary, computers, food, coffee, alcohol,
entertainment, clothes, fuel, rent and so on. **

**Official (ie DEST) estimates suggest that losses here could be roughly
equal in magnitude to direct higher education investment losses –
increasing total regional losses to \$400 million pa. Retaining just
half of the activity associated with this sum would mean a shot in the
arm for and its region worth some \$200 million pa – four times the
current annual budget of the City of . And along with these losses go a
wide range of jobs – jobs scattered across the full employment spectrum
and encompassing both high end knowledge economy and more routine
service work. Retaining this money and activity could well mean the
difference between a “thriving” future for and one of continuing
decline. **

Finally, serious support for higher ed-ucation would demonstrate that
the State Government, notwithstanding the Commonwealth’s important role
in the sector, understands the meaning of its long term strategic
planning res-ponsibilities in the field of higher education.

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">Patient investment </span>**

To argue for long term planning horizons is not to argue for delay. It
is worth restating, however, that the *University Endowment Act* of 1904
was passed some 10 years before UWA came to life as a going university.
Those in charge of our fledgling State understood that creating a
university was a big undertaking and so they did not try to do it all
once. They did it a bit at time – they set aside land in 1904 but did
this not knowing quite when or on what scale they would have to start
paying out for capital works and, likewise, uncertain about how
operational costs would be met. They argued then, too, it is interesting
to note, about the fairness of imposing fees on students and the wisdom
denying poorer bright students a university education.

**Those in charge of our fledgling State in the early years of the
20^th^ Century understood that creating a university was a big
undertaking and so they did not try to do it all once. They did it a bit
at time and they set aside land first. They passed the** *University
Endowment Act* **in 1904, conferring about 1600 ha of land on UWA some
10 years before it began its life. **

But the most important point here is another one. They did not, on day
one, add up every cost, throw their hands in the air and declare that it
was all just too hard. They staged the whole exercise and they did the
easiest thing first: they set aside land. At that point only two things,
apart from the land, were certain: their determination and their good
faith - and how much the poorer would we Western Australians be today if
they had not set about the work of government in this far-sighted and
courageous way? Setting aside land at the Midland Workshop today would
be as just easy and would cost no more than the taxes and administrative
costs involved in transferring real estate.

**The people of - and WA - were well set up by those who laid the
foundations of UWA. The current Government could do the same for now.**

Our State Government today could demonstrate its courage and good faith
to the people of the region by firmly setting aside a suitable portion
of the Workshop site for future higher education uses. Just as the
people of Perth (and WA as a whole) were set up for the following
century and beyond by those who laid the foundations of UWA, so, too,
could the current Government now put in place the ground work for an
institution building process to better provide for the people of
north-eastern metropolitan Perth long into the future.

By 2030 the population of this region will certainly reach 500,000 and
it could well be home to some 20,000 university students. Should they
all be commuting to the City’s western districts for their higher
education?

**girder bridge sections for the mt lawley subway under constuction in
the mildand railway workshops – below: The finished subway**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">9. University Funding</span>**

The question of funding for new universities is always a good counter
argument: Thus “it costs millions to build universities and millions
more each year to keep them going.” Then the lament: “Where is all the
money to come from? already has too many universities!” It sounds
plausible enough but the case overlooks two important considerations.
First university student numbers are growing at a significant rate and
second, students can, for a variety reasons, be considered to be
self-funding. That is to say, when they come to study at university,
they bring their own funds. More students are coming and they are
bringing their own funds.[^20] There is, in this big picture view, no
funding problem. Let’s look at these issues one at a time: sector growth
and self-funding students.

### The inevitable growth of higher education

As everywhere in , demand for higher education in WA will grow and this
growth will be fuelled by:

-   population growth (fed by im-migration if all else is wanting);

-   the more demanding skill re-quirements of a competitive know-ledge
    economy and rising uni-versity participation rates;

-   growth in overseas student num-bers.

Overall, growth is inevitable and, indeed, university student numbers
could well double in coming decades rising from a current national total
of 700,000 to around 1.4 million by 2030 if growth rates prevailing for
the past decade continue into the future – see ***Box 5**.*[^21] There
will, therefore, be a need for new higher education cap-acity. Would any
one dispute that and its region can stake a legitimate claim to some of
it. As already noted, there are currently 7,500 students in the region
and this number could, again, grow to 20,000 in 20-25 year time – if it
catches up to average participation rates.

**Domestic university student numbers could double in coming decades –
perhaps rising from a current national total of 700,000 to around 1.4
million by 2030. There will, therefore, be a need for lots of new higher
education capacity – and there will be very little argument about this.
There will be argument, rather, about how much of that capacity students
pay for themselves and, more relevant in the present context, argument
about where new capacity will be located. should be readying itself now
– by setting aside inner urban land. **

###  *Recent Australian university enrolment trends - including overseas students*

**1992 total university students 559,000 **

**2002 total university students 835,000 **

**Total growth for decade 35%**

**Growth for overseas students for decade 35%**

***The Australian* May 7^th^ 2002**

####### Self-funding students

University students can be considered as self-funding for two reasons.
As in many public service domains under-going rationalisation and
“restruct-uring”, university students are in-creasingly considered to be
customers who come to university to “buy” their education and degrees.
They may be paying with a mixture of their own money, borrowed money or
gov-ernment grants but they are buying and they are customers. In other
words, again, the money to maintain universities comes with the
students. This is so even while governments continue to subsidise
university study. It is starkly and unmistakably so when they cease to
pay these subsidies and when students must save or borrow to pay the
full costs of tuition. Considered within the frame of this bigger
picture, the proposition that there is no money is a serious
distortion.[^22] And the consequences again are two fold: high costs for
region students (time, travel costs, inconvenience) and enormous losses
to the regional economy.

**Whether they are paying with their own money, borrowed money or
government grants, students are coming to university to buy their
educations as customers. And the truth now is simply this: students in
already have the money necessary to pay for a university in . They are
just being denied the opportunity to do so – and forced to travel a long
way to do their shopping.**

In the not so distant past it would not have been possible to make so
simple a case – for at least two reasons:

-   universities relied more sub-stantially on one-off capital grant
    funds – seriously complicating the unit (per student) cost and cost
    accounting picture;

-   accounting systems and practices were not sufficiently well
    devel-oped or rigorous to identify the costs associated with
    providing services to each student.

But, in today’s world of rationalising public service delivery, these
things are changing. Government today prefers accurately delivered
recurrent funds based on full-cost accounting to the unpredictably and
imprecision of *ad hoc* grant funding regimes and so encourages the
former at the expense of the latter. The reasons for this include not
just precision and pre-dictability but also accountability and
performance management.

In the present context, these changes are critically important for
another reason as well. They facilitate the integration of the two once
entirely separate worlds of private and public sector financing – as the
latter adopts the language of the former. Thus universities – even
publicly funded universities – can, if they conduct their business and
their accounting on a commercial basis, access private sector bankers,
financiers and investors for their development and growth needs much
more easily. If university planners go to them, knowing what it costs to
provide a service, knowing that they can price it competitively and
still show a profit, then deals will be done. A new university in could
establish itself in this world. Just two further qualifying points.

There are many reasons for feeling uncomfortable with this new world but
one can be dispelled easily and quickly. Rational accounting and
commercialised funding do not entail privatisation, for that is an
entirely separate issue. The changes outlined above mean that government
ceases to directly fund **service providers**. Rather, government funds
service providers indirectly by funding **service users** – with all or
some portion of the cost. It is in this way that customers and a culture
of customer service are created. Privatisation proper, on the other
hand, involves the absolute withdrawal of government funds – whether
directly or indirectly provided.

New rationalised recurrent funding based on full cost recovery will not
spell an end to one off capital funding grants - public and private for
universities. They will remain important – especially in relation to
research. Overall, however, they will become less important. Having said
this, a number of funding sources that a developing university in might
tap include:

1.  Regional centre development funding;

2.  Partners in the precinct;

3.  Specific purpose development grants; and

4.  Smart value-capture

######### **Regional centre development and educational planning**

It is not impossible that a future Federal or State Government will come
forward with metropolitan regional development/investment programs over
the next decade - of the kind that assisted both the and the Subiaco
Redevelopment Authorities. Despite attempts to consolidate the city, a
recent Government research paper clearly indicates that the bulk of ’s
future population growth in coming decades will take place in the outer
suburbs.[^23] The same paper also acknowledges that pressures for
well-developed regional centres will, as a consequence, only become
greater. Eventually both Commonwealth and State Governments will be
forced to act. **Meanwhile, strategically valuable sites should not be
given over to sub-optimal uses just because that time has not quite come
yet.** It is the capacity to think ahead and to make appropriate
decisions here that sets inept Governments apart from intelligent ones –
like those that set land aside for UWA a century ago.

######### **Partners in the precinct **

Innovative approaches to higher education increasingly favour
institutional flexibility, fluidity and diversity. This means closer
relations and more co-operation between service providers and sectors,
easier student movement between them, more cross-enrolment,
cross-fertilisation and credit transfers as well as the increased
sharing of infrastructure, resources and so on.

Institutional innovation of this kind also brings with it possibilities
for system wide economies and funding innovation. A higher ed-ucation
precinct established on this more fluid model need not rely on “new” and
dedicated university funding alone. Rather, substantial fun-ding could
come from existing (or future) specific departmental capital works
budgets. Some possibilities are already in an exploratory phase within
the Department of Education and Training. They have been referred to
above in the context of the MRAs planned community learning centre. Thus
a university presence could take DET on as a joint venturer. A range of
less orthodox contributors to the community learning centre have also
been identified – and could form parts of an even larger integrated
whole or precinct (see ). This precinct model has been embraced by the
Swan Tertiary Education Working Party and, in principal, at least, the
idea should be welcomed.

If such a centre is to properly provide for ’s educational require-ments
in the new century, however, it needs to be built upon or around a
planned and substantial university presence. No such presence is
currently on anybody’s drawing board. Part-icipants in the planning
process speak “off the record” about securing a university presence “by
stealth” but this cannot and will not deliver the required results – and
it will almost certainly fail to deliver results if no land has been
reserved for future university development. , in any event, deserves
better than this. It deserves properly planned university facilities
which are central, strong and visible – not marginal or meagre or
invisible.

**The most detailed description of the precinct model is to be found in a report commissioned by the Swan Tertiary Education Working Party. The report**[^24] **identifies and documents the following agencies or organisational forms as potential participants in its favoured precinct model: **
====================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================================

**\* community engagement centres; **

**\* universities (from beyond as well as within WA; **

**\* skill centres; **

**\* research centres; **

**\* business incubators; **

**\* alternative post compulsory learning centres; **

**\* brokerage hubs.**

**Specific purpose development grants**
=======================================

From time to time and for specific purposes, both the Commonwealth and
State Governments make one-off capital grants to universities. Not
surprisingly, these can be very substantial in the early development
phases of new universities. While much of the discussion above has
involved arguing that funding by these means is becoming less important,
it should not be written off. There are still traditional university
funding sources and is no less entitled to benefit from them than are
other regions. Yes, this may be a bold demand. But it is not a demand
for any Treasurer to reach into his or her pocket at short notice. It is
a firm but patient request to begin planning for important capital
expenditure both well in advance and in manageable steps or stages. The
way it should always be done.

**……………………**

To take advantage of funding opp-ortunities of the kinds outlined above,
planning authorities in need to do three things:

-   immediately cease committing pro-perty, and especially the Work-shop
    Site, to sub-optimal uses;

-   declare alternative and serious long term higher education
    development intentions; and, as suggested above,

-   remain farsighted and patient – to take advantage of both new ideas
    and new opportunities to fund them as these present themselves.

Point 3 is especially important. If it is innovative and well conceived,
the whole project will, over time, attract funding in a variety of
forms. Second, the reasons for making funds available will become more
socially (and politically) compelling as the State’s growth and need for
high level skills outstrips current higher education capacities – as
will inevitably happen.

######### 

#### Smart value capture

A final possible source of development funds should also be mentioned –
the site itself. Could the MRA have underestimated the value of the
site? (We have, on the basis of very little information, assumed that
the MRA is working on the basis of an estimated value of \$100 per
square metre.) If this figure is too low, the land represents an
undervalued asset here. And if this is, in fact, the case, why not
dedicate surplus revenue to constructive capital works purposes – to
serious higher education investment in .

Unfortunately, the MRA has denied the author of this Report access to
the data and modelling assumptions on which its future land value and
revenue projections are based. The inform-ation, it claims, is
commercially sensitive. The Minister, however, could order a review of
the financial modelling and there is at least one additional (additional
to the possibility of routine underestimation) reason for doing this:
the value of the site and its abutting lands still in public ownership
would increase dramatically if a substantial higher education precinct
incorporating a serious university presence was placed at its centre.
Original forecasting did not take this properly into account. And we
know this because, in the late 1990s, the idea of a substantial
university presence on the Workshop site was dismissed as a joke in
official planning circles.

**DRILL PRESS**

This matters for two reasons. It matters because the capital funding
required to pay for physical infrastructure could, in part at least, be
created by the external benefits generated by the project – provided
smart value capture strategies are put in place. How irrational would it
be to reject this argument? Sadly, such irrationality is common enough
and there are many precedents for the thoughtless sacrifice (or
intentional misdirection) of external benefits belonging to taxpaying
communities.

**spring makers **

It also matters because, just as some planned land uses enhance land
values in surrounding districts, others can have the opposite effect.
Thus it is unclear how the MRA’s decision to commit substantial land to
unspecified commercial, large format retail and light industry on the
Workshop Site’s eastern side (with huge sterile parking areas) will
effect the value of its west end land holdings and projects.

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">\
</span>**

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">10.Conclusions</span>**

’s existing universities have shown little interest in ’s higher
educational future. They do not want to come to – and why should they
move east for as long as most students from the region can be forced to
bear the costs of commuting or relocating to the west – or even of
missing out? As they transform themselves into business entities,
universities become less able, as corporate bodies to orient themselves
to public interest concerns. This is the less fortunate side of the
commercialisation of universities briefly discussed above. Governments
however, are not businesses and they remain bound by considerations of
public interest and social good.

In the absence of local university interest in , Friends of Midland City
University are cam-paigning for a new university - . And they will
continue to do so while the State’s existing universities remain
indifferent. The State Government, however, has more options. It could
pressure the State’s existing universities to show a real interest in
the region.[^25] Taking a wider view, it could also impress upon them
the importance of a joint “industry plan” which balanced commercial
imperatives against industry-wide social obligations to the people of WA
wherever they happen to live.

Ironically, it is Brendan Nelson, Federal Minister for Education in a
non-Labor government, who is shaping up as (national) planner here. We
do not, of course, welcome most of his rationalising and restructuring
aspirat-ions. But his realisation that higher education development now
calls for planning horizons beyond those of any individual institution
is welcome.

There will be the predictable hue and cry about independence but
universities now need to secure their independence in different and more
effective ways. They need to so collaboratively, not as a divided rabble
in which all imagine themselves to be standing heroically alone – or in
beggar-thy-neighbour fashion. They need to understand that they are each
a part of a system of higher education – the sum of which is greater
than its parts. Having said that, the obligations and requirements of
that system and the shape of its intellectual life, will be best defined
by the universities themselves acting in concert. Only in this way are
they likely to be able to stand firm against partial interest, parochial
vision or political whim. Nelson’s initiatives will certainly make for
an interesting new chapter in the history of higher education in . But
that, of course, is another story.

#### 

#### Key recommendations

**The State Government should:**

1.  **grant or guarantee** the availability of land sufficient for long
    > term future higher educational – including university -
    > development in . This could mean the balance of the Midland
    > Re-development Authority (MRA) controlled lands in public
    > owner-ship and not contractually com-mitted to other users;

2.  **amend** the *Redevelop-ment Act* so that it:

-   enshrines commitment to a Midland Higher Education Precinct in
    > legislation;

-   gives official recognition to the pre-eminent claims which a higher
    > education precinct has over the Railway Workshop Site and
    > adjoining publicly owned lands under the control of the MRA;

-   protects prospective Precinct sites from sub-optimal develop-ments
    > and developments hostile to the above high grade uses;

1.  **establish** a new Management Board that brings together expertise
    > and experience relevant to the amended *Act* and includes more
    > direct representation from, herit-age, higher education and
    > post-secondary education sector stake-holders;

2.  **\
    > direct** the Board, through the *Act*, to develop a 20-25 year
    > strategic redevelopment plan – a plan based on both a clear vision
    > of the region’s future and a well-researched understanding its
    > current cultural and higher ed-ucational development needs;

3.  **direct** the Board to develop a strategic plan that

-   includes provision for senior high school, technical and uni-versity
    > education;

-   includes provision for in-creasing integration between these
    > educational sectors;

1.  **direct** the Board to develop a strategic plan integrating
    > heritage, secondary and post-secondary and higher educational uses
    > in order to maximise

-   community access and respons-iveness to local needs;

-   potential for innovation and creativity;

-   institutional cross-fertilisation and synergies;

1.  **establish** an expanded and app-ropriately qualified Executive and
    > provide the new Board and Executive with a working budget that
    > recognises the pre-eminently social and public interest character
    > of its charter;

2.  **ensure** that current community and education initiatives relating
    > to heritage and higher education take their place within a long
    > term planning framework and dis-courage piecemeal efforts likely
    > to replicate Edith Cowan’s failed higher education experiment on
    > the Railway Workshop Site.

3.  **order** a review of the original financial modelling and
    > forecasting conducted by the MRA in order to plan its development
    > and re-development work.

4.  **encourage** the State’s existing uni-versities to develop an
    > “industry plan” which incorporates a clear social charter and
    > which refers to the higher educational needs and reasonable
    > expectations of all people in WA – including those living in the
    > region.

**<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">garett locomotive in
background</span>**

[^1]: These places exist as result of an impulsive Ministerial gesture
    involving Brendan Nelson over a celebrity breakfast hosted by the
    Swan Chamber of Commerce. The places are un-supported by any long
    term plan or co-ordinated commitment on the part of the State and
    Commonwealth Governments. They are currently managed by .

[^2]: The lower figure if currently low regional university
    participation rates (2.8%) continue and the higher if the region
    catches up with average participation rates in the rest of today
    (3.9%).

[^3]: \$30,00 for full time students but relevant calculations in this
    Report conservatively assume average actual students to be engaged
    on a 67% time basis.

[^4]: Figures for the year 2000.

[^5]: By our best rough and ready reckoning. The MRA has refused to
    provide us with relevant financial information.

[^6]: See MRA’s planning intentions as these are expressed in the
    recently revised concept plan: ***midlandmetro***.

[^7]: Over and above the unobjectionable police facilities already
    established on this part of the site.

[^8]: This expression is not original. I know, for example, that it was
    as used in the title of Des Ball’s book, *A Suitable Piece of Real
    Estate: American Installations in Australia,* Hale and Iremonger,
    1980.

[^9]: Based on the continuation of recent 3% growth rates.

[^10]: Vintila 2001, citizenonline.org Since published in *Urban Policy
    and Research*, 2003.

[^11]: Vintila 2001

[^12]: Based on regional population projections and average university
    participation rate.

[^13]: Though recent evidence suggests a quite volatile market.

[^14]: The 1904 *Act* conferred huge tracts of land on the [then] future
    .

[^15]: We estimate that the Workshop Site has a forecast (improved)
    value of \$100 psm - the MRA has been extremely unhelpful in
    providing any hard information concerning the basis of its
    valuations, calculations and projections.

[^16]: *Midland Reporter*, May 25^th^ 2004.

[^17]: 20 equivalent full time places made available last year and
    currently administered by .

[^18]: Now defined by the alignment of The Crescent and incorporating
    Midland Gate.

[^19]: Assuming a conservative average of \$15,000 pa per full-time
    student for tuition costs – and discounted by one-third to establish
    EFTSU.

[^20]: The source of these funds will be discussed in a moment.

[^21]: See also *Higher Education: Report for the 2004 to 2006
    Triennium*, Minister for Education, Science and Training.

[^22]: It is true that the Commonwealth appears to be providing
    government supported places at only about half the rate of growth
    noted above. But it is at the same allowing and facilitating an
    increasing number of fully private places. See again, *Higher
    Education: Report for the 2004 to 2006 Triennium*, Minister for
    Education, Science and Training.

[^23]: *Dialogue with the City*, Issues Paper, Department of
    Infrastructure and Planning, WA, 2004.

[^24]: The report – *Midland Education Precinct: Models for the Delivery
    of Tertiary Education Services* - was prepared by the AAAJ
    Consulting Group in 2003.

[^25]: State Governments have more than moral leverage and authority. As
    Commonwealth contributions to universities have declined, state
    government contributions have been increasing. There are also the
    possible implications of a less regulated higher education
    environments to consider. In this future world, many of the region’s
    20,000 students 20 years hence could well become the customers of an
    enterprising overseas university. The State Government needs to make
    sure that everyone understands that we are living on the threshold
    of this brave new world.

